Quantum information science is an interdisciplinary field that looks to understand the analysis, processing, and transmission of information through the lens of quantum mechanics principles. It combines the study of Information science with quantum effects in physics. It includes theoretical issues in computational models as well as more experimental topics in quantum physics including what can and cannot be done with quantum information. The term quantum information theory is also used, but it fails to encompass experimental research in the area and can be confused with a subfield of quantum information science that studies the processing of quantum information.
Quantum teleportation, quantum entanglement and the manufacturing of quantum computer hardware require serious understanding of quantum physics and engineering. Since 2010s, there has been a remarkable progress in manufacturing quantum computers, with companies like Google and IBM investing heavily in quantum computer hardware research. Today, it is possible to build a quantum computer with more than 100 qubits. However, the error occurrence is so large that we cannot say that we have a material suitable for quantum computers yet. Majorana fermions may be one of the key materials. Devices for quantum cryptography have been commercialized already. There is an old cipher called a one time pad, which was widely used among the spies in the Cold War era. It uses a long sequence of random keys. If two people exchanged same random keys safely, it is impossible to decrypt one time pad except by accident, but key exchanging is not easy. However, the key exchanging problems can be solved by exchanging quantum entangled particle pairs. Quantum mechanical laws such as no cloning theorem and wave function collapse provide secure exchange of random keys. So, manufacturing devices that can transport quantum entangled particles is an important scientific and engineering problem.  Programming languages for quantum computers are also needed. Q Sharp and Qiskit are popular quantum programming languages.
Quantum algorithm and quantum complexity theory are two of the subjects in algorithms and computational complexity theory. In 1994, mathematician Peter Shor published his prime factorization algorithm. If one has a 1,000-qubit quantum computer, one can threaten most widely used ciphers such as RSA and ECC by using Shor's algorithm. It can result in serious security problems for many countries. Therefore, his paper triggered a lot of investment in quantum computing research. Many mathematicians and cryptologists are preparing to enter the quantum computing era. See post quantum cryptography.